Farnesyltransferase inhibitors block the neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) malignant phenotype. 
Neurofibromatosis type I (NF1) is a hereditary tumor and developmental disorder whose defective gene was cloned previously. The protein product of the NF1 gene, neurofibromin, contains a domain that shows significant sequence homology to the known catalytic domains of mammalian Ras GTPase-activating proteins (GAP) and the yeast IRA1 and IRA2 proteins. This homologous region of neurofibromin has been shown to exhibit GAP activity toward Ras proteins. Malignant schwannoma cell lines from NF1 patients contain normal levels of GAP and nonmutated Ras proteins but barely detectable levels of neurofibromin, based on genetic mutations in the NF1 gene. Because these cells contain constitutively activated Ras.GTP, it has been proposed that neurofibromin may be the sole negative regulator of Ras in these cells. Overall, these results have implied an important role of the Ras signaling pathway in NF1 malignant schwannomas. Recently, several laboratories have developed small molecule inhibitors of Ras function that inhibit the enzyme farnesyltransferase (FT). FT-mediated post-translational farnesylation of Ras proteins is absolutely necessary for Ras function since this modification is required for the anchoring of Ras proteins to the plasma cell membrane. Although previous studies have shown that FT inhibitors can block the growth of tumor cells carrying mutant Ras proteins, it remained unclear how this class of inhibitors would affect tumor cells such as in NF1, whose malignant growth appears to be mediated by up-regulation of wild-type Ras activity. Thus, in the current study, we investigated whether BMS-186511, a bisubstrate analogue inhibitor of FT, would inhibit the malignant growth properties of a cell line established from malignant schwannoma of an NF1 patient. Our results indicate that the malignant growth properties of ST88-14 cells, the most malignant cell line among several well-characterized NF1 cells, are inhibited by BMS-186511 in a concentration-dependent manner. Following treatment with BMS-186511, ST88-14 cells became flat, nonrefractile, were contact-inhibited, and lost their ability to grow in soft agar. In the drug-exposed cells, Ras proteins were prevented from FT-mediated membrane association. BMS-186511 was found to specifically inhibit FT, but not geranylgeranyltransferase I, a closely related enzyme. Thus, it is conceivable that FT inhibitors may ultimately become the first generation of drugs against the malignant phenotype in NF1 based on rational insights into the mechanism of action of neurofibromin.
